In this lecture, you'll learn about the third and last option for inter-VLAN routing, which is to
use a Layer 3 switch.
Now, you're less likely to get tested on this option in the CCNA exam, but it's actually the option
which is most commonly used in the real-world.
So, I wanted to explain it to you here to give you the complete picture.
So looking at our lab topology, it's the same as before where we've got a switch, which has got both
Engineering and Sales PCs plugged into it,
and we've split that into an Engineering and a Sales VLAN. And we put the Engineering PCs in access
ports for the ENG VLAN,
the Sales PCs are configured on access ports for the Sales VLAN.
Once we've done that, the PCs will be able to communicate with each other within their own VLAN.
But because the two VLANs are also in different IP subnets, ENG is using 10.10.10.0, Sales
is using 10.10.20.0, we're going to need to configure routing between them as well.
The first two options we covered used an external router.
This option, we're going to do the routing actually on the switch itself.
So to be able to do that, you can't use a lower-end Layer 2 only switch.
It has to be a Layer 3 switch to be capable of doing routing.
When you do have that, the switch, it doesn't use a physical interface for the routing.
It uses a virtual interface,
that is our SVI, a Switch Virtual Interface. So see with the config here,
we configure interface VLAN 10 and then IP address 10.10.10.1, and interface VLAN 20
and IP address 10.10.20.1.
Those virtual interfaces will act as the default gateways for the PCs.
Whenever a PC sends traffic into the switch, we've already configured the switch with the access port
with the correct VLAN on there, so the switch knows which VLAN the traffic is coming in on. So, it
knows which SVI would correspond with that.
As long as we've got IP routing enabled on the switch and we've configured our SVI, Switch virtual
Interfaces, it's going to be able to route traffic between the two different VLANs.
Now, notice on here in my topology diagram,
I've also got an external router
even though the switch is able to do routing itself.
The reason for that is the external router is connected out to the Wide Area Network.
It's quite often the case that your connection to a service provider is not going to be using an Ethernet
port,
and our Layer 3 switches only support Ethernet.
So if you need to use a different type of interface, you're going to need to have a separate, dedicated
router for that.
Another reason would be that maybe there's some kind of WAN feature that is required that again is
not supported on the switch, that is only supported on an external router.
So, that's why we've also got the external router for the WAN connectivity.
So whenever we've got any traffic between our internal VLANs, that is going to get routed on the switch.
That traffic never goes up to the router.
But whenever there's any traffic that needs to go outside the Local Area Network, that needs to go
out to the WAN, that is going to get sent up to the router.
So, let's check the configuration for this. Before we look at that WAN connectivity configuration, here,
we're just doing the inter-VLAN routing.
So this is going to allow traffic between our PCs that are on the internal network, between the Eng
and the Sales PCs. At global config,
first off, we have to enable IP routing and then we configure our SVIs.
So we say 'interface vlan 10', 'ip address 10.10.10.1' with a / 24 mask, and 'interface vlan 20',
'ip address 10.10.20.1 255.255.255.0'.
Once we've done this, the Engineering and the Sales PCs are going to be able to communicate with
each other.
We still need to do our WAN routing configuration as well through.
So if I look back at the topology diagram again, you'll see that is interface fastEthernet0/1 on
the switch which is connected up to the router, and I need to put an IP address
directly onto that physical interface. So to do that, I need to configure it as a Layer 3 interface.
A Layer 3 interface means that it's going to have an IP address on that interface.
So I say 'no switchport' for that, then I can put the IP address on the interface.
So I say 'ip addresse 10.10.100.1' with a /24 mask, and I need to configure the route to
send all traffic up to the router
that's it's going out to the WAN. So 'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
next hop 10.10.100.2.
I also need to configure a matching configuration on the router as well.
If you look back at the diagram again, the inside interface in the router is fastEthernet0/1,
the outside is fastEthernet0/2.
So on the inside interface, I configure IP address 10.10.100.2, and on the outside
interface in this example, it's IP address 203.0.113.1. Then I need to configure
a default static route for traffic going out to the WAN,
So that's 'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
next hop address
203.0.113.2,
and then I also need to configure a route for the internal LAN traffic as well. I could have
configured two different routes,
one for 10.10.10.0/24, and one for 10.10.20.0/24,
but I can do that with a single summary route.
So I configure 10.10.0.0 255.255.0.0, next hop on the switch 10.10.100.1,
and that covers me for both of the 10.10.10.0 network and the 10.10.20.0 network.
Going back to the diagram again, when we did the first two options with a router with separate interfaces
or Router on a Stick, the router was directly connected to the
10.10.10.0 and the 10.10.20.0 networks,
so I didn't need to configure an explicit route for it.
In this example, it's the switch which is connected to those networks.
The router is not,
so I do need to configure a route in this example.
Okay, so that is the configuration.
Looking at the considerations here, traffic being routed within the campus is now routed across the
switch backplane.
It doesn't need to travel up and down physical cables to an external router, like what's happening with
the first two options.
But as we mentioned earlier in this lecture, you might still need an external router for WAN connectivity
and services.
Okay, so that is all of the theory for our Layer 3 switch.
Next up is to configure it in the lab,
I'll do that in the next lecture.